Q.) What is an ER Model
A.) The ER Model is a conceptual model for designing a database. This model represents the logical structure of a database.

It is a high-level data model which defines the data elements and relationships for a specified system. This model is based on three basic concepts:
1.) Entities
2.) Attributes
3.) Relationships

Entities: It may be an object with physical existence ( ex: person, car, house ) or it may be an object with a conceptual existence ( ex: company, job, course )

An Entity set is a set of entities of same type

Attributes: Characteristics of an entity

Relationship: Represents the association between entity types

Q.) Types of Attributes
A.) 
1.) Simple Attribute: These have values that cannot be divided further ( normal ellipse )
2.) Composite Attribute: This kind of attribute can be divided further into simple attributes
3.) Key Attribute: It can uniquely identify an entity from an entity set. Text is underlined
4.) Multivalued Attribute: It can hold multiple values. Represented by double ellipses
5.) Derived Attribute: It hold dynamic value and is derived from another attribute. Represented by dashed oval. 
( ex: age of a person )
6.) Stored Attribute: The attribute that gives the value to get the derived Attribute
( ex: DOB of a person )
7.) Complex Attribute: Composite and multivalued attributes nested arbitrarily
( ex: Person having multiple addresses )
8.) Description Attribute: Attributes of relationship set
9.) Partial Key:

Q.) Types of keys
A.)
1.) Super Key: set of one or more attributes which can uniquely identify a row in a table
2.) Candidate Key: Minimal super key with no redundant attributes.
3.) Primary Key: It is selected from a set of candidate keys.
Done by DBA
4.) Foreign Key: Attribute of a table that points to the Candidate key of another table.

Q.) What is a Relationship set ?
A.) A set of relationships of same type.

Q.) What is Degree of a relationship set ?
A.) The number of entity sets participating in a relationship set. Unary , Binary , Ternary , Quaternary 

Q.) What is Cardinality ?
A.) The number of times an entity of an entity set participates in a relationship set is know an cardinality.
One to one , many to many , one to many , many to one .

Q.) What is total and partial participation ? 
A.) If each entity of the Entity set is involved in the relationship then it is known as total participation. Represented by double line, otherwise the participation is partial

Q.) What is relationship constraint ?
A.) Cardinality and participation constraint.
Participation constraint: Controls whether a relationship is mandatory (total) or optional (partial)
Cardinality: Controls the ratio of the relationship

Q.) What is EER model ?
A.) The Enhanced ER model is an extension of the traditional ER model used to represent complex database requirements. As data complexity increases, the basic ER model becomes insufficient.
Features of EER model:
1.) Super class and subclass Entity set types
2.) Specialization
3.) Generalization
4.) Attribute Inheritance
5.) Categorization
6.) Aggregation

Q.) What is Superclass and Subclass ?
A.) Superclass is a higher-level entity set that has common attributes. Subclass is a lower-level entity set that inherits attributes and relationships from its superclass but also has its own specific attributes or relationships. This supports the concept of inheritance, where a subclass automatically possesses the features of the superclass.
( ex:  Science is Super class which has subclasses like Physics, Chemistry, Biology )

Q.) What is Generalization and Specialization ?
A.) Generalization is a bottom-up approach grouping similar lower-level entities (specialized class) into a single higher-level entity (generalized class) , while specialization is the opposite top-down approach, breaking a higher-level entity (generalized class) into more specific lower-level entities (specialized class)

Q.) What is Categorization ?
A) A Category ( or Union type ) is a subclass that is derived from two or more super classes that may not be related. It allows the model to represent an entity that can be a member of more than one entity set.

Q.) Attribute and Relationship Inheritance ?
A.) In the EER model. subclasses inherit all attributes and relationships of their supercclasses. This supports reusability and data consistency, as common attributes don't need to be redefined

Q.) What is an Aggregation ?
A.) Aggregation is an abstraction through which relationships are treated as higher-level entities. This let's us represent relationships among relationships





